major edits (#739)
graphprotocol/docs: website/pages/en/sunrise.mdx

---
title: Post-Sunrise + Upgrading to The Graph Network FAQ
---

> > Note: The Sunrise of Decentralization ended June 12th, 2024.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: The Sunrise of Decentralized Data ended June 12th, 2024.
```

## What was the Sunrise of Decentralized Data?

> The Sunrise of Decentralized Data was an initiative spearheaded by Edge & Node. This initiative enabled subgraph developers to upgrade to The Graph’s decentralized network seamlessly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Sunrise of Decentralized Data was an initiative spearheaded by Edge & Node, to enable subgraph developers to upgrade to The Graph’s decentralized network seamlessly.
```

> This plan drew on previous developments from The Graph ecosystem, including an upgraded Indexer to serve queries on newly published subgraphs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This plan drew on previous developments from The Graph ecosystem, including an upgrade Indexer to serve queries on newly published subgraphs.
```

### What happened to the hosted service?

> The hosted service query endpoints are no longer available, and developers cannot deploy new subgraph versions on the hosted service.

Reviewer: Not just new versions, but new subgraphs too, right?

Author: Both! So I'll just state it as "subgraphs"

During the upgrade process, owners of hosted service subgraphs could upgrade their subgraphs to The Graph Network. Additionally, developers were able to claim auto-upgraded subgraphs.

> ### Was Subgraph Studio be impacted by this upgrade?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Was Subgraph Studio impacted by this upgrade?
```

> No, Subgraph Studio was not impacted by Sunrise. Subgraphs were immediately available for querying, powered by the Upgraded Indexer, which used the same infrastructure as the hosted service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No, Subgraph Studio was not impacted by Sunrise. Subgraphs were immediately available for querying, powered by the upgrade Indexer, which used the same infrastructure as the hosted service.
```

### Why were subgraphs published to Arbitrum, did it start indexing a different network?

> The Graph Network was initially deployed on Ethereum mainnet but was later moved to Arbitrum One in order to lower gas costs for all users. As a result, any new subgraphs are published to The Graph Network on Arbitrum so that Indexers can support them. Arbitrum is the network that subgraphs are published to, but subgraphs can index any of the [supported networks](https://thegraph.com/docs/en/developing/supported-networks/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Graph Network was initially deployed on Ethereum mainnet but was later moved to Arbitrum One in order to lower gas costs for all users. As a result, any new subgraphs are published to The Graph Network on Arbitrum so that Indexers can support them. Arbitrum is the network that subgraphs are published to, but subgraphs can index any of the [supported networks](/developing/supported-networks/)
```

> The Graph Network was initially deployed on the mainnet Ethereum but was later moved to Arbitrum One in order to lower gas costs for all users. As a result, any new subgraphs were published on Arbitrum to The Graph Network so that Indexers could support them. Arbitrum is the network that subgraphs are published to, but subgraphs can index any of the [supported networks](https://thegraph.com/docs/en/developing/supported-networks/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Graph Network was initially deployed on Ethereum mainnet but was later moved to Arbitrum One in order to lower gas costs for all users. As a result, any new subgraphs are published to The Graph Network on Arbitrum so that Indexers can support them. Arbitrum is the network that subgraphs are published to, but subgraphs can index any of the [supported networks](https://thegraph.com/docs/en/developing/supported-networks/)
```

## About the Upgrade Indexer

> > The upgrade Indexer is currently active

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The upgrade Indexer is currently active.
```

> The upgrade Indexer improved the experience of upgrading subgraphs from the hosted service to The Graph Network and supported new versions of existing subgraphs that had not yet been indexed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The upgrade Indexer was deployed to improve the experience of upgrading subgraphs from the hosted service to The Graph Network and support new versions of existing subgraphs that had not yet been indexed.
```
(not 100% sure about the term "deployed" here, I just don't think "improve" or "support" should be in the past tense)

Author: "implemented"

### What does the upgrade Indexer do?

- It bootstraps chains that have yet to receive indexing rewards on The Graph Network and ensures that an Indexer is available to serve queries as quickly as possible after a subgraph is published.
- It supports chains that were previously only available on the hosted service. Find a comprehensive list of supported chains [here](/developing/supported-networks/).
- Indexers that operate an upgrade Indexer do so as a public service to support new subgraphs and additional chains that lack indexing rewards before The Graph Council approves them.

### Why is Edge & Node running the upgrade Indexer?

Edge & Node historically maintained the hosted service and, as a result, already have synced data for hosted service subgraphs.

### What does the upgrade indexer mean for existing Indexers?

Chains previously only supported on the hosted service were made available to developers on The Graph Network without indexing rewards at first.

> However, this action unlocked query fees for any interested Indexer and increased the number of subgraphs published on The Graph Network. As a result, Indexers have more opportunities to index and serve these subgraphs in exchange for query fees, even before indexing rewards were enabled for a chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, this action unlocked query fees for any interested Indexer and increased the number of subgraphs published on The Graph Network. As a result, Indexers have more opportunities to index and serve these subgraphs in exchange for query fees, even before indexing rewards are enabled for a chain.
```

The upgrade Indexer also provides the Indexer community with information about the potential demand for subgraphs and new chains on The Graph Network.

### What does this mean for Delegators?

> The upgrade Indexer offers a powerful opportunity for Delegators. As more subgraphs were upgraded from the hosted service to The Graph Network, Delegators benefited from the increased network activity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The upgrade Indexer offers a powerful opportunity for Delegators. As it allowed more subgraphs to be upgraded from the hosted service to The Graph Network, Delegators benefit from the increased network activity.
```

> ### Did the Upgrade Indexer compete with existing Indexers for rewards?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Did the upgrade Indexer compete with existing Indexers for rewards?
```

No, the upgrade Indexer only allocates the minimum amount per subgraph and does not collect indexing rewards.

It operates on an “as needed” basis, serving as a fallback until sufficient service quality is achieved by at least three other Indexers in the network for respective chains and subgraphs.

### How does this affect subgraph developers?

> Subgraph developers can query their subgraphs on The Graph Network almost immediately after upgrading from the hosted service or publishing from Subgraph Studio, as no lead time was required for indexing.

Reviewer: I'm not sure this question/answer is useful as is. Maybe it would be better to explain the differences in deploying/publishing new subgraph versions between hosted service and Subgraph Studio? And also highlight what _didn't_ change: how to develop subgraphs itself (e.g. subgraph manifest, schema, mappings, etc.) should be exactly the same, as far as I know.

> ### How did this benefit data consumers?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### How did Sunrise benefit data consumers?
```
(just to justify keeping it in the past tense, but if "this" is the upgrade Indexer, I think it should be in the present)

> Subgraph developers can query their subgraphs on The Graph Network almost immediately after upgrading from the hosted service or [publishing from Subgraph Studio](https://thegraph.com/docs/en/publishing/publishing-a-subgraph/), as no lead time was required for indexing. Please note that [creating a subgraph](https://thegraph.com/docs/en/developing/creating-a-subgraph) was not impacted by this upgrade.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subgraph developers can query their subgraphs on The Graph Network almost immediately after upgrading from the hosted service or [publishing from Subgraph Studio](https://thegraph.com/docs/en/publishing/publishing-a-subgraph/). Please note that [creating a subgraph](/developing/creating-a-subgraph) was not impacted by this upgrade.
```
Relative URLs are better, otherwise translations link to English content. 🙏

> The upgraded Indexer enabled chains on the network that were previously only supported on the hosted service. Therefore, it widened the scope and availability of data that could be queried on the network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The upgrade Indexer enables chains on the network that were previously only supported on the hosted service. Therefore, it widens the scope and availability of data that can be queried on the network.
```

> ### How did the upgrade Indexer price queries?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### How does the upgrade Indexer price queries?
```

> The upgraded Indexer enables chains on the network that were previously only supported on the hosted service. Therefore, it widens the scope and availability of data that can be queried on the network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The upgrade Indexer enables chains on the network that were previously only supported on the hosted service. Therefore, it widens the scope and availability of data that can be queried on the network.
```

> The Indexer upgraded its pricing model to align with market rates in order to avoid influencing the query fee market.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The upgrade Indexer prices queries at the market rate to avoid influencing the query fee market.
```

### When will the upgrade Indexer stop supporting a subgraph?

> The upgrade Indexer serves a subgraph until it is sufficiently and successfully served with consistent queries served by at least 3 other Indexers.

Reviewer: Hmm, repeating the word "served" sounds like a potential mistake?

Reviewer: Maybe this is what we mean?
```suggestion
The upgrade Indexer supports a subgraph until at least 3 other Indexers successfully and consistently serve queries made to it.
```

Author: would be fair to state "The upgrade Indexer serves a subgraph until it is sufficiently and successfully supported with consistent queries by at least 3 other Indexers"

Reviewer: Hmm, not sure what "successfully supported" means. IMO, the "success" aspect refers to query success rate.

Reviewer: I also feel like "supports a subgraph" is more correct than "serves a subgraph". An Indexer serves _queries_ made to a subgraph, not a subgraph itself, right?

Author: correct!

Furthermore, the upgrade Indexer stops supporting a subgraph if it has not been queried in the last 30 days.

> Other Indexers are incentivized to support subgraphs with ongoing query volume. The query volume to the upgrade Indexer trended towards zero, as it has a small allocation size, and other Indexers were chosen for queries ahead of it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other Indexers are incentivized to support subgraphs with ongoing query volume. The query volume to the upgrade Indexer should trend towards zero, as it has a small allocation size, and other Indexers should be chosen for queries ahead of it.
```
